My Emails Are Out Of Control

You know how your email inbox can just get out of control? Mine was getting to that point, and I decided I needed to take back some control. Now, I'm not one of those people who tries to have a zero inbox - that's just too much work. But I do want to be able to keep my inbox from getting overwhelmed.

So, I started using some code to analyze and clean up my existing messages. Let's take a look at what I came up with.

The first script I wrote is called "who_has_email_the_most". It loops through 11 months of emails in your inbox, using something called the IMAP protocol. What it does is build a list of the top senders - that's who's been emailing me the most. Then, it displays the results.

I also wrote a script to mark certain emails for deletion. This one just removes one email address at a time, but it can be useful if you have a lot of emails from the same sender cluttering up your inbox.

So, let's talk about what I found in my analysis. It turns out that most of my emails are from newsletters and transactional emails - things like shipping updates and order confirmations. Now, I wish there was a way to set a time limit on how long these types of emails stay in my inbox. That would be really helpful.

But until then, I'm just going to have to do some data deletion. And it turns out that Outlook.com has a feature called Sweep that can help with this - but I didn't know about it at the time, so I'll just be deleting some of these emails manually.

Let me show you what my results looked like. The top offenders were things like news@eyebuydirect.com and shipment-tracking@amazon.com. These are the ones I'm going to focus on getting rid of first.

So, how am I planning to tackle this problem? Well, first, I'm going to unsubscribe from these top offenders. That should help reduce the number of emails I get from them in the future.

Next, I've written some scripts to delete these emails automatically. This will save me a lot of time in the long run - no more manually deleting thousands of emails!

I also set up some rules on my email provider's web portal to archive certain types of emails. And finally, I plan to run this script every month or so to see which senders are still emailing me the most.

Overall, it's been a bit of a process, but I'm hoping that with these scripts and some regular maintenance, I'll be able to keep my inbox under control for good.
