This is research on Bluetooth proximity using open tools such as hcitool, btmgmt, l2ping, and hcidump. It is a follow-up to the blog post titled Raspberry Pi Bluetooth Proximity.

The image accompanying this post shows a Bluetooth device that can be discovered with a simple scan.

Next, we look at the commands. For the following instructions, you should replace the placeholder MAC with the actual Bluetooth MAC address you are working with.

First, to scan for Bluetooth LE devices, you would run the command: timeout with signal SIGINT set to 30 seconds, using hcitool with the lescan option.

Second, to get Bluetooth LE devices along with their RSSI values, you would use the command: btmgmt find. The response might look like this:

On hci0, a device was found with the address SOME_MAC, type LE Random, RSSI of negative 92, and flags 0x0000. The AD flags are 0x1a, and the eir_len is 14.

On hci0, another device was found with the address SOME_MAC, type LE Random, RSSI of negative 97, and flags 0x0000. The AD flags are 0x1a, and the eir_len is 18.

On hci0, a device was found with the address SOME_MAC, type LE Random, RSSI of negative 77, and flags 0x0000. The AD flags are 0x06, and the name is N016Y.

On hci0, a device was found with the address SOME_MAC, type LE Public, RSSI of negative 100, and flags 0x0004. The AD flags are 0x00, and the eir_len is 28.

On hci0, a device was found with the address SOME_MAC, type LE Random, RSSI of negative 94, and flags 0x0000.

Third, to ping a Bluetooth-enabled device without pairing, you would use the command: l2ping with the count flag set to 3, followed by the MAC address. The response might look like this:

Ping: SOME_MAC from THIS DEVICE, with a data size of 44 bytes.

44 bytes received from SOME_MAC, id 0, time 6.05 milliseconds.

44 bytes received from SOME_MAC, id 1, time 9.90 milliseconds.

Heart symbol, 2 sent, 2 received, 0 percent loss.

Fourth, to dump all data of a paired Bluetooth device, you would use the command: hcidump with the -a flag.

Fifth, to request authorization from a device, you would run two commands in sequence: hcitool with the cc flag and the MAC address, followed by a semicolon, and then hcitool with the auth flag and the MAC address.

Sixth, to attempt a connection and then get the RSSI value, you would use the command: hcitool with the cc flag and the MAC address, followed by the logical AND operator, hcitool with the con flag, followed by the logical AND operator, and finally hcitool with the rssi flag and the MAC address. The response might look like this:

Connections:
ACL connection with the MAC address, handle 12, state 7, lm MASTER.

RSSI return value: negative 4.

This attempts to connect, which doesn't work, but the RSSI value is now present for the device.

Seventh, to attempt to get the RSSI value without trying to connect to the device, you would use the command: hcitool cmd with the arguments 0x05, 0x0005, 0x00, 0x00, and the MAC address.

Finally, here are some resources for further reading. You can find the links on the blog post.

These resources include information on unix bluetoothctl and bluetooth-sendto tools, getting started with Bluetooth low energy, Raspberry Pi Bluetooth commands, accessing a terminal over Bluetooth, an IEEE Xplore document, a PDF from Semantic Scholar, a Stack Overflow answer, and a Raspberry Pi forums discussion.
