Hey there! I’m diving into a fun project for this one: bringing my Sony A6000 camera into the modern era. Now, this camera is a gem, even though it was made way back in 2013 or 2014. I snagged it on eBay as a second-hand purchase, and now I want to give it a modern makeover by improving its data transfer capabilities, increasing resolution, and possibly even adding GPS functionality.

I’ve come across a few hurdles along the way. The main challenge is finding a way to directly connect and communicate with the camera. It has a Wi-Fi hotspot, which sounds great, but unfortunately, it enters a "dumb mode" when I try to use it for data transfer. It also limits a cell phone to no internet. Another option is the USB mass storage mode, but it turns out to be a bit problematic. Whenever pulling data too quickly, it just freezes up. Plus, it's pretty sluggish with its USB 2.0 connection which can take hours to download data.

Luckily, I've discovered the PC remote feature, which can be quite handy when the camera is connected to a computer. There's this fantastic library called GPhoto2 that works wonders in this scenario, especially if I'm running Linux. It allows me to perform various actions on the camera remotely, like capturing images. However, I'm not keen on attaching a Raspberry Pi to my camera unless it's absolutely necessary. Alternatively, I'm considering a microcontroller with an OTG port as a potential solution.

Join me on this hacking journey as I explore ways to modernize my Sony A6000 camera! If you want to see the micro version of part two, you can find the link on the blog post.

Let’s get started with getting data fast.

First, let's talk about the hurdles. These files are large. Twenty-four point three megapixels averages around seven to ten megabytes per photo.

There are a few specific issues to solve. First, downloading the data from the disk is mandatory as the USB transfer rate is too slow. Using the SD card seems to be the best way. Second, the file names are really ugly. They have a format of DSC followed by a number, which just iterates plus one. That is meaningless to understand. I adopted a format using the image's timestamp: Year, Month, Day, underscore, Hour, Minute, Second. While I could save as timestamp via the camera settings, I chose to opt out of that behavior, which I will explain later. Third, DSLR cameras can take multiple pictures in a second. So, appending the image count to the end of that format is important, like timestamp underscore count. And fourth, offloading to external storage is key. I'm using OneDrive since it's available in the web, mobile, and desktop experiences.

I wrote a quick Python script to solve these problems. You can find the code on the blog post if you want to see it. This script solves it in a three-part process: download, rename, and then transfer to storage. Each step requires pauses for verification, but could be altered in the future for more post-process work. My thought would be to use Darktable more frequently, but this works for most cases.

Here is what that process looks like in practice. The script finds the disk, sees fourteen files, and asks you to press Enter to copy. It copies the files from the camera's directory to a temporary folder on your computer. Once copied, it asks you to press Enter to rename. Then it lists out the moves, for example, moving DSC 08808 to a file named with the date and time, like 2023 June 12 at 15:14:32. It does this for all fourteen files. Then it asks you to press Enter to move them to the final location, and once done, it says "Done."

Now, let’s explore some other features.

First up is using the camera as a web camera. Capturing the output of the camera is easy using a mini-HDMI to HDMI cable and then an HDMI Video capture device. It shows up as a web camera device on the computer. The output is 1080p, which is good enough for most meetings. Scott Hanselman has a good write-up on this topic on his blog, which you can find via the link in the post.

One thing to watch out for is that the camera heats over time. To deal with this, open the screen to help dissipate the heat. The screen is always on unless you go into the menu, page two, subpage three, FINDER/MONITOR, and select FINDER.

Here is the gear list I used for this setup: a Sony A6000 body, which is a 24.3 MP mirrorless camera; an AC-PW20 power adapter, which acts as a dummy battery for continuous power; and an HDMI to USB3 capture adapter, which makes the camera output show up as a webcam. You can find these items on Amazon via the links in the blog post. Also, Jeff Geerling has a great post on how he livestreams with OBS, a Sony a6000, and a Cam Link, which you can find on the blog.

Next is the USB Connection using PC Remote. The PC Remote of the camera could be used in conjunction with the above approach to get and control aspects of the camera. You access it by going to the menu, the last tab, fourth sub-tab, and the first option. For example, you can get information about the battery level or configuration settings. I used the gphoto2 CLI tool to extract this information. It works great on Linux systems. It doesn't support Windows directly; however, I found that it worked wonderfully with Windows by doing a USB pass-through to WSL. You can read more about that Microsoft documentation on the blog. One minor annoyance is that a command must be sent otherwise it will stay in "Connecting," which makes the camera useless until done.

There are a few useful commands. First, to get a summary, you run a command that tells you what you can do with the device. It lists the manufacturer as Sony Corporation, the model as ILCE-6000, the version, serial number, and vendor extensions. It also lists capture formats, display formats like JPEG and ARW, and device capabilities like File Download and Sony Capture. It also provides a storage devices summary and a device property summary, showing things like compression settings.

Second, to get the battery level, you run a specific grep command on the gphoto2 configuration output to pull out the current percentage.

Third, to capture an image and download it with a timestamp, you run a command that captures and downloads the file, naming it with the current date and time.

Next, let's look at Sony's Camera SDK. Sony's SDK is kind of bad, but also good. There is a Python binding called libsonyapi on GitHub that gave some helpful hints about the API endpoints, but it was still a no-go for my full use case. You have to put the camera in smart remote mode via the Apps tab, Application List, and Smart Remote Control. It will stay in this mode until connected to it.

I did a quick NMAP scan when connected to the camera. The scan started, loaded scripts, initiated an ARP Ping Scan, and then a SYN Stealth Scan. It discovered two open ports: 8080 and 61000. It then initiated a service scan. So, it's just the two services it needs to allow the mobile app to make its calls. Using their SDK, this works!

I wrote a simple Python script to interact with it. You import the camera and actions from libsonyapi. You create a camera instance, get the camera info, print the name and API version. Then you execute the action to take a picture. This will take the camera out of the app screen. The camera kind of goes into dumb mode. Only the basic modes can be used. I set it to "Intelligent Auto" to keep taking regular photos. It only supports a few API calls! Which means this camera won't be able to download any files via the API restful endpoints. At least it's not supported, sadly.

When taking the picture, the response gives back an image URL. Yay! But it's odd looking compared to the original ones that are downloaded. The exif data shows the dimensions of that image is 1616 by 1080. So it's a thumbnail. The real image is 4000 by 6000. The only identification is the datetime stamp, which is useless for unique file naming.

My last effort was to update the app. It looks like it's possible to do that still. The Smart Remote Control app was updated and a ton of new features showed up! You can find the specifications on the PlayMemories Camera Apps website via the link in the post.

After digging around, I found that the post view image size could be changed to the Original file! Since taking a picture is the only way to get to that URL, indeed it gave the full path on disk. It returned a URL like http://192.168.122.1:8080/postview/memory/1000/DCIM/100MSDCF/DSC08843.JPG.

Here is the quick script to capture and download. You import requests and the camera modules. You create a function that captures and downloads. You set the post view image size to Original. You execute the take picture action. You grab the image URI from the result. You use requests to get the content of that URI. And you write that binary data to a file called img.jpg.

Could I do some URL hacking to get other files? Yup! I took a photo manually then tried the updated URL. I now can download all the files by iterating backwards from the last known photo! When the bytes of the images end, it's over. I'm sure Sony didn't want this for a reason... likely it would kill the camera, so use it at your own risk!

Next up is creating Super High Resolution Images. Doubling the camera's 24 megapixels output is possible by using a burst of pictures! It took a few days of hacking to get this right.

The process involves a few steps. First, take pictures with the smart remote API. Four seem to be the max at ten-second intervals. Second, read images into memory. Third, resize images by 200 percent. Fourth, align similar features in the images. Fifth, blend with transparency of 50 percent. And sixth, repeat this three times, since it would be the first two super images, then the last two super super images to one. So, 24.3 times 2, times 2, equals 97.2 megapixels! It looks more like a 48.6 megapixel version. You can see the super resolution code on GitHub via the link in the post.

The core of the code involves reading two images using OpenCV. You define an interpolation method, like Lanczos 4. You set a scale factor of 2. You resize both images by that scale. Then you use a function to align the images, handling any slight shifts. Finally, you write the resulting higher-resolution image to a temporary JPEG file.

Finally, let's talk about GPS.

A GPS module doesn't exist natively for this camera. I've done a few proof of concepts, but they have pros and cons. There are multiple ways to solve this.

First, you can use your phone to generate a QR code, then take a picture of it in the camera. It can be post-processed. Second, you can use something like Google Maps history to match image times with GPS locations. Third, you can use a hardware device, like a Neo 6M, hooked up to a Raspberry Pi or microcontroller to collect time and location, then post-process. And fourth, my favorite is a combination of methods. This is to add a super small GPS device that was hooked up to a Raspberry Pi Zero mounted on the camera. With a quick proof of concept, it worked well! Unfortunately, uploading files to the camera seems impossible, at least with all the options I've tried. The other major issue is that something like a Raspberry Zero W 2 has a limit of 64 gigabytes of storage. So it should be offloaded quickly.

Here is the gear list for the GPS setup: a u-blox NEO-6M GPS module for logging time and location for post-processing; and a super small GPS module for the Pi Zero build. You can find these on Amazon via the links in the blog post.

I also wrote a quick Python script to collect GPS data off the GPS serial device. You import serial and pynmea2. You connect to the serial port, for example COM4, with a baud rate of 9600. You create a NMEA stream reader. In a while loop, you read a line from the serial port. If the start of the data matches GPRMC, you parse it using pynmea2. You then extract the latitude and longitude and print them out.

In conclusion, adding modern features to the Sony A6000 camera has its challenges, and it is possible to overcome them with a little creativity. One possible solution to improve data transfer capabilities and add GPS functionality is to use a Raspberry Pi as a bridge between the camera and other devices. It could provide a stable and fast connection, allowing for seamless data transfer and GPS tracking. With the added capabilities of the Raspberry Pi, the Sony A6000 camera can truly be brought into the modern era. You can see the full code on GitHub via the link in the post.

And if you want to see the micro version of Part 2, you can find that link on the blog post as well.
