Another tutorial for building a garage door opener with a raspberry pi. I've left the garage door opened too many times. You can find the source code and the link on the blog post. This tutorial assumes you have a raspberry pi with wifi and the ability to ssh in.

The image we're looking at is a photo of a Raspberry Pi computer, specifically a bare board model, which serves as the brain for this whole setup.

Let's look at our goals. First, we want to use Docker so it can easily be shared, restored, or managed in other ways. Second, we need a simple web API for control. For that, we will use nodejs as much as possible for the build. Third, the system needs to be able to toggle the garage door. Fourth, it needs to report the status of the garage door. Fifth, we need to toggle the light switch on the garage door unit. And sixth, optionally, we might add a cheap camera to see what's going on.

Here is what you will need. You need a Channel DC 5V Relay Module for Arduino; this simulates the button press to toggle the door, and you can buy it on Amazon. You also need some cheap containers to throw everything into, which holds the electronics, available on Amazon. Next is the Liftmaster 41A5273-1 Multi-Function Control Panel, which bypasses the anti-tamper wiring, also from Amazon. You will need a Raspberry Pi 3 to run Docker and the web API, which you can get from Amazon. Finally, as an option, there is a Sony Play Station Eye Camera for PS3, which is a cheap camera with two zoom modes and four microphones, found on Amazon.

In my research and discovery phase, I found that there are a ton of these garage door projects out there, and I was inspired by many of them. The LiftMaster garage door system has anti-tamper hardware measures which almost ended the project before it started. I decided to take a gamble and buy another garage door opener circuit that directly connects to the garage door unit. Bingo! Two circuits can be connected at the same time. However, Docker permissions and finding a base image for the raspberry pi took a few hours. The lesson learned is that hardware interaction with docker can take a few extra steps.

Let's talk about wiring. The relay module is stacked on top of the LiftMaster module then taped onto the Raspberry Pi. Note that the relay connections are wired for normally opened. If you look at the images in the post, you will see the setup sealed up in a glad container; it's kinda hacky but it's cheap. You will also see the LiftMaster circuit, where the narrower end has the button for opening the garage, and the larger end has the button for the garage door light. The middle points are for the circuit to connect to the main garage door unit.

There is a specific GPIO pin layout for the relays and reed switch, not including power leads. The reed switch is connected to the part of the garage door on pin 18 and a ground. Once the door moves away, then the reed switch is disconnected.

The entire setup is messy but it's good enough. I cut some holes with a knife for wires and to hold it in place. The camera has been added with duck tape. This uses a standard install of motion, though there isn't a dockerfile for that part.

For the installation, you first need to install docker on the raspberry pi. You can find the official guide on the raspberry pi blog post. Once that is done, you run a specific command to pull in Docker from the internet. After that, you clone the repository and move into the folder. Then, you run the docker build for the image, tagging it as garage-pi. To start it, you run the docker image in privileged mode. This will expose port 8090 for web access. To test it, you make a simple request to localhost on that port.

There are other API commands available as well. You can check the status by hitting the garage status endpoint. You can toggle the garage door via the garage toggle endpoint. You can toggle the light via the light toggle endpoint. And finally, there is an exit command at the exit endpoint. That's it!

On the code side, we have a function that simulates the button press for the garage door opener circuit. The relay turns on for 500 milliseconds, then off. There is an interesting issue with the relay: as soon as the gpio utility exports, it triggers it on. So this code exports then unexports a pin that the relay is on to manage that behavior.

There is also one python file that checks the status of the garage door. The configuration was different enough where it needed to be done in python there. The reed switch should always read true until the door has been opened. I'm open for pull requests on this! I'm considering moving all the gpio logic to python and then using nodejs strictly as the api router.

To summarize, the hardware side is built and working. The API has enough information to check and toggle the garage door. I am going to create a script to watch the door status with Node-red due to the ease of configuration. This project took about 2 days with testing and debugging. There is a screenshot of the node-red template in the post, which is still a work in progress. The flow file is available in the repo code if you want to check it out.
