My Emails Are Out Of Control

My inbox is full. Not in the sense of storage capacity, but my mental capacity. Email is here to stay and I have chosen not to commit to a zero inbox game. So this is my attempt to use some code to analyze and clean up existing messages. Let's get some control back.

The TLDR is: the "who has emailed the most" script loops through 11 times by 30 days in an inbox using an IMAP protocol. It builds a list of the top "From" email addresses and then displays it. The "mark for deletions" script handles removing a single from email address at a time. You can find the link to the code on the blog post.

Mostly newsletters, some transactional. Having a time-to-live on some of these emails would make sense. That's not a feature I'm aware of, so let's just do some data deletion. Edit: there is a feature called Sweep in Outlook.com that does this.

Here is the data:

news at e dot eyebuydirect dot com with 290 emails
shipment-tracking at amazon dot com with 218 emails
friendupdates at facebookmail dot com with 215 emails
express at em dot express dot com with 211 emails
Costco at digital dot costco dot com with 207 emails
photos at onedrive dot com with 195 emails
noreply at redditmail dot com with 179 emails
order-update at amazon dot com with 178 emails
Shutterfly at em dot shutterfly dot com with 159 emails
REDACTED01 at REDACTED01 dot com with 157 emails
ProFlowers at news dot proflowers dot com with 151 emails
USPSInformeddelivery at email dot informeddelivery dot usps dot com with 149 emails
marketplace-messages at amazon dot com with 122 emails
microsoft dot start at email2 dot microsoft dot com with 114 emails
redcross at theamericanredcross dot org with 112 emails
REDACTED02 at REDACTED02 with 106 emails
newsmax at latest dot newsmax dot com with 101 emails
noreply at email dot amctheatres dot com with 95 emails
jobs-listings at linkedin dot com with 95 emails
reply at rs dot email dot nextdoor dot com with 93 emails

My solutions were:

First, unsubscribe from the top offenders.
Second, using a script, delete the top offending emails.
Third, create some rules to archive emails via the web portal.
And fourth, run the script for top offenders monthly to evaluate who is wasting my time the most.

A bit of house cleaning will keep some sanity in my inbox. With the addition of automation, it should get better over time.
