Title: Power Switch Monitor with an Arduino device

The biggest rule for home automation is not to change existing behavior of users that causes inconvenience or frustration. Which is a rule that easily forgotten. Let's use the classic example of a smart light bulb in a living room. A user typically flips a switch to turn on and off a light. Now they have to ask Alexa, Google, or use an app on their phone. This is bad.

Here is a GIF showing a person looking visibly frustrated.

It's causing an inconvenience because the user can't flip a switch.

Solutions

The 2 common solutions presented in this situation:

First, blocking the user with tape or other mechanism. Checkout Thingiverse to see how common this is. You can find the link on the blog post. This changes user behavior so it's a bad idea.

Second, replacing the light switch with a smarter one. This is the best option but requires a hardware replacement of the light switch. Which may not be possible, costly and potential dangerous to do-it-yourself!

Third, a third hybrid solution: Trigger the smart device with the existing light switch using power wall outlet as feedback using an Arduino device with WiFi. In this solution, the light switch changes the power state of the outlet that the Arduino based micro controller is monitoring. When the light switch is turn on/off it changes the power to the Arduino analog voltage GPIO pin. That sends a message off to a home assistance to notify the smart device. In US based homes, the 2nd wall outlet still has power so it provides constant power to the device. Here is a diagram to get an idea of the flow to toggle the smart bulb state from a user.

The image depicts a flowchart illustrating the power monitor setup. It shows the connection from the light switch to the power outlet, feeding into the Arduino device, which then communicates via MQTT to the home automation system to control the smart light.

The advantages:

Simple and low effort.
Use existing switches to make them smart.
Ability to control multiple devices with a single switch.
Open source.

Building the Device

Step 1: Get the Components and Solder Them

Tools:
Soldering iron.
Third hand or vise.

Material:
Wemos mini d1 from Amazon or similar esp8266 / esp32 device.
2 x resistors, any two usually works, i used 10k.
Wire.
2 5v usb wall chargers.
1 male usb plugin.
1 regular usb charging cable for the esp32.
led.
solder.
Optional: bme280 or bme680.

There is an image of a breadboard version of the circuit.
There is an image of the schema version of the circuit.
There is an image of the Wemos mini d1 lite with bme680 front view.
There is an image of the Wemos mini d1 lite with bme680 back view.

Step 2: Download and Upload Software

Flash your device with a Tasmota firmware. You can find the link on the blog post.

Tasmota Module configuration

Set to: Generic Module then click Save. the device will restart.

D2 - I2C SDA (6) - BME680
D1 - I2C SCL (5) - BME680
A0 - Analog (1) - connected to 5V power supply resistor divider

Tasmota Console

Send when external light switch power is on, send 1.

The command is: Rule1 ON analog#a0>1000 DO Backlog Rule1 0; Rule2 1; Publish cmnd/masterlight/SWITCH 1 ENDON

When external light switch power is off, send 0.

The command is: Rule2 ON analog#a0<1000 DO Backlog Rule1 1; Rule2 0; Publish cmnd/masterlight/SWITCH 0 ENDON

Enable rule 1: Rule1 1

Ensure you have MQTT enable then look at the console for messages similar to this:

The console output shows various status messages. It indicates that MQTT is active, displaying statistics such as uptime, heap size, and signal strength. It also logs the state changes of the switch, showing that when the switch state changes, the corresponding MQTT topics are published, such as cmnd/masterlight/SWITCH being set to 1 or 0, reflecting the on or off state of the connected device.

The MQTT topic is cmnd/masterlight/SWITCH with a boolean value of either 1 for open or 0 for close. The topics are for state or the reed switch sensor value Switch2 that are sent every 5 minutes, which is configurable, via MQTT.

Step 3: Add to a Home Assistance

So here comes the part that could change per user preferences. I'm using NodeRed but this could be done with other home assistance software. Get the MQTT message then process notifications you would like.

There is an image showing the NodeRed power monitor setup, which illustrates the flow of nodes receiving the MQTT message and triggering the appropriate actions.

Resources

You can find the following links on the blog post for further information:
Adafruit's guide on the BME680 humidity, temperature, barometric pressure, VOC, and gas sensor.
Bosch Sensortec's page for the BME680 gas sensors.
A tutorial on the BME280 sensor for Arduino.
