Here is the rewritten spoken script:

Securing an ASP.NET WebApi for PCI application tests is no trivial matter. It can take weeks of planning and the app to be analyzed. After reviewing OWASP and other related XSS sites, the web.config was the first to be updated to prevent against attacks, including MIIM and XSS.

You're probably wondering how to do this. Well, let me walk you through it. In your system.webServer element, add the following configuration settings.

Imagine a long list of security headers that need to be set up in your web.config file. We're going to remove all the existing ones first, so we start with a clear slate. Then, we'll add new ones that will help protect against cross-site scripting attacks and other vulnerabilities.

These new settings include things like X-Frame-Options, X-XSS-Protection, and Content-Security-Policy. These are all important for preventing attacks from happening in the first place.

The Content-Security-Policy is particularly interesting because it determines where resources can come from on your website. You need to decide what's safe and what's not when it comes to loading JavaScript and CSS files from external sources.

For example, if you're using Google Analytics or Bootstrap on your site, you'll want to make sure that's accounted for in your policy. You can find more information about how to set up a Content-Security-Policy on the blog post, but basically, it involves being very specific about what you allow and don't allow.

Now, I know this might seem like a lot to take in, so let me summarize some of the key points. First, make sure you're using established frameworks that have already been tested for security vulnerabilities.

In addition to setting up your web.config file, there are other tools and techniques you can use to protect against XSS attacks. For example, you could apply an AntiXss attribute from a project called ASP.Net Web API AntiXss Attribute. You can find more information about this on the bitbucket page.

Another good idea is to use a Website Application Firewall for your apps. This will help block malicious traffic and prevent attacks before they even get started.

Finally, it's always a good idea to test your app regularly with tools like Nikto2, sqlmap, or OWASP Zap. These can give you some valuable insights into what needs securing.

The main takeaway here is that you shouldn't rely on just one layer of protection. Use multiple techniques and tools to ensure that your app is as secure as possible. And don't forget to stay up-to-date with the latest security guidelines and best practices. You can find more information about XSS and web security on OWASP, which has a wealth of resources available.

I want to leave you with some references in case you need to do further research. There are plenty of online communities and forums dedicated to web security that can be very helpful. Just remember, securing an ASP.NET WebApi is no trivial matter, but with the right tools and techniques, you can make it happen!
